[Tagging] Data quality guidelines (#5417)
Subway-Builder-Modded/The-Railyard: DATA_QUALITY.md

  _In addition, workplace data is often more difficult to obtain than resident data, and is more likely to be suppressed or estimated. A map that can accurately model workplace demand is therefore more likely to be a high-quality map overall._

- **Resident — 0.35.** _Resident data is scored the second highest; it represents the origin side of every commute and is generally more uniformly distributed than workplace data. While less load-bearing than workplace nodes, residential density provides a solid foundation for modeling commute flows._

- **O/D — 0.15.** _O/D data is scored the lowest; a gravity model can provide approximate (if unrealistic) flows from the origin/destination sides alone, so a measured O/D refines rather than creates demand. However, O/D data is still valuable for macro-flow fidelity which a gravity model would otherwise smooth over._

Within the Workplace and Resident pillars, quality further splits into a **count** (the ground-truth magnitude and the grain it is measured at) and a **dasymetric** (how that count is placed in space within the ground truth grain), as discussed in the following sections.

### **Relationship to the self-reported quality tag**

> The Railyard `registry` currently records data quality as a single author-declared `source_quality` tag — `high` / `medium` / `low`. That tag is a useful first cut to distinguish map quality, but is limited in several ways this rubric is built to address:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Registry currently records data quality as a single author-declared `source_quality` tag — `high` / `medium` / `low`. That tag is a useful first cut to distinguish map quality, but is limited in several ways this rubric is built to address:
```

this is how i did the rest of the docs.

for final website docs I'd remove this entirely since imo there's no reason to reference the old system (i think a discord announcement is sufficient for that) so to not confuse people

Author: Makes sense -- I can push this down into a `Context` section after we launch it

# **Data Quality Scoring Guidelines**

> This document describes the criterion that will be used to judge the data quality of a specific map or set of maps for Railyard.

Reviewer: the maps go to the Registry, not Railyard (or at least that's how the current docs are + this will be a registry doc)

The intent for this system is to both measure the objective quality of the raw data bounding the demand modeled within a map (for internal review) and then distill that quality into a single, usable metric for non-technical users (players)

## **1. Criterion**

> A Subway Builder map is a closed-system model of how residents within a city normally commute; the provenance of the underlying census / official statistics bounds how realistic that model can be, and the quality of that data is what this rubric is intended to measure.

Reviewer: i think sentences like this can be made significantly simpler without losing any info/quality of the doc. i know the doc is technical, and i'm not disputing that that will need to be the case, but i do think that there are some sentences (like this one) that can be simplified without the loss of any important info if that makes sense.

Countries around the world publish these statistics in disparate formats and with varying methodologies; this rubric is **NOT** intended to be an exhaustive reference of what can be used to model a Subway Builder map (or macro commute flows in general), but rather to provide a reasonable framework for comparing the relative quality of different data sources and the maps they produce.

This rubric thus scores data quality along **three pillars**, weighted by how much each shapes modeled demand:

| Pillar        | Weight | Captures                                        |
| :------------ | :----: | :---------------------------------------------- |
| **Workplace** |  0.50  | the destination side — where the jobs are       |
| **Resident**  |  0.35  | the origin side — where people live             |
| **O/D**       |  0.15  | the pairing — who commutes from where, to where |

**Why these weights?**

> - **Workplace — 0.50.** _Workplace data is scored the highest; it is more concentrated than resident demand, and the nodes they would produce within a modeled map are the most load bearing. A concentrated set of destination points is more sensitive to misplacement than a more diffuse set of origin points, and primate destination nodes provide a model with clear structure._

Reviewer: same with this one. i feel the wording could be a tad simpler and still get the point across

_Some countries will refuse to provide data points that contain only a handful of residents; therefore it is important to cross-check the total metric counts for a particular administrative boundary level against a known unsuppressed ground truth total of a coarser granularity. If the totals mismatch greatly, it is likely the artifact of data suppression._

### **Choosing the grain for hybrid or ambiguous sources**

Granularity scores the grain at which a count's **magnitude** is measured — not the finer grain it may ultimately be placed at (that finer placement is credited in the [Dasymetric](#3-dasymetric) section). Some sources blur the two: a total measured at a coarse unit is redistributed to finer units that carry their own partial signal. To resolve which grain to score:

1. **Find where the magnitude is actually measured.** A total published per municipality and then spread across buildings by a model is _measured_ at the municipality — score that grain; the finer placement earns its credit only in the dasymetric (R × I).

> 2. **Determine whether the finer units carry independent magnitude information of their own.** If they do — establishment employee-size bands, per-building dwelling counts — the finer grain is partly measured, not pure interpolation, and the effective grain sits **between** the coarse anchor and the fine unit; for example:

Reviewer: i'm a bit confused in this section

Author: This is to account for cases like MX/slurry's methodology. 

The ground truth (from my understanding) for MX workplace countsis both at a very coarse level and very fine level (depending on what is suppressed, and what industry is being looked at).

To score MX we need to use _some_ grain, but it's ambiguous.

Reviewer: ah okay that makes more sense thank you for the clarification

Choosing to model only those persons who both live and work within the map boundary is a design choice, but it should be noted that this will reduce the relative magnitude of modeled commute flows and may skew against nodes located at the periphery.

### **Special Demand — a separate layer, outside the normal modeled flow**

The three scored pillars cover **commute** demand — the normal home → work flow the map models. Most pipelines also inject **special-demand** points that are deliberately **not** part of that normal modeled flow: attractions (museums, temples, stadiums, ski resorts, etc.), hospitals, airports, ports and other generators of unique trips.

These are generally modeled using a visitor or throughput magnitude as an analogue to commuter traffic. Because it is a different kind of demand, and is net-optional for a submitted map, this layer is deliberately **not** scored.

A map with a well-cited special-demand layer is materially better than one that invents attraction weights, even when the two score identically on the commute pillars, but that distinction is not captured in this rubric.

### **Data Vintage & Temporal Coherence**

> Some census / official data is of COVID-vintage, wherein O/D is lower than normal, and WFH rates are higher (which can in particular skew physical workplace-based census data). This rubric does not attempt to penalize COVID-vintage data, as even though it may be less representative of the pre-COVID world, it is still a real-world measurement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some census / official data is of COVID-vintage, wherein O/D is lower than normal, and work from home rates are higher (which can in particular skew physical workplace-based census data). This rubric does not attempt to penalize COVID-vintage data, as even though it may be less representative of the pre-COVID world, it is still a real-world measurement.
```

if you haven't already spelled it out you should, as will most acronyms you use. i wouldn't expect everyone to know all acronyms, especially since there's a lot of mappers who don't natively speak English

Author: Done for this one lmk if there are others
